What's happening?
Well, as you know, the collection is going up for sale.
And that should be sometime in October.
And some of these.
And we should have a very fine catalog.
I'll...
course miss miss the collection but hopefully uh like jerome kern who uh just before the stock market crash in 29 had the foresight to sell his collection and the next day after the crash he uh started buying all over again and uh i am a absolutely
motivated book collector who cannot pass by a used or antiquarian bookshop, who, as we speak, is planning what he's doing next weekend as far as what book fairs are in a 500-mile radius.
I have not stopped my hunting
and searching for reading material and collecting books.
But it is necessary at this point in my collecting career and in the collecting career of my wife.
As you know, my wife and I collect not only...
I collect rare books, but my wife and I collect together American paintings, and furniture, and artiques.
And we've been known to... We've been known to... Mises has been written about us, that their data can go by that we don't acquire something.
And does that continue to this day?
That still continues.
It's very difficult to stop a generation, at least, of collecting habits.
But what we found is that we want to pare down.
We're going to move into smaller quarters.
And it just won't be the opportunity
is to keep a fine, rare book collection of the size and scope of this one.
And therefore, although we give away most, up to this point in time, although we give away most of the collection,
What we normally do, just so you have an idea, is we believe that putting... You want to stop it for once in a while?
Sure.
I say you're not going to... You're going to extract from anyone.
Okay.
But if something you have, you put it on.
If you'd like, you can see the books at some of these at any time.
Number one.
Number two, I'd like you to see the context of where the books were, so you'd understand.
And it's very important, because when you write about it,
My end.
I think I want you to understand the home that these books were in.
I want you to understand the library that was built for these books.
And I think that when you see this, it's going to blow you.
I don't mean to do this to you.
It will.
I'm not bragging.
I want to give you the kind of material.
See, what I have done, it's a renaissance kind of thing.
I'm going to blow my horn only because I'm trying to give you material.
Some people might think it's blowing your horn, by the way.
just so I can give you information.
I want to give you a context.
I saw stuff at the Grollier Club, too, so I know the quality of the stuff we're talking about.
And the Shakespeare's weren't there.
Right, exactly.
And the King James Bible wasn't there.
There were 200 items that weren't there anymore.
Yeah, and I'm sure that they were probably the most valuable.
Yeah, there's things I didn't want to send down because it wasn't value.
So, I mean, I know the quality of the material that we're talking about.
Exactly.
I know.
I've seen some of them.
Well, let me tell you this.
I want you to see...
the objects that surrounded the material.
I want you to see the home the material was in, the library, the physical library.
I want you to understand that what I wanted to reconstruct, what I wanted to reconstruct, being a collector since the last 28 years, not a book collector, but an all-around collector, book collecting, used books, that's always been
and acquire, I've always acquired used books, and aquarium books.
It's only been like a 10 year, give or take a 10 year passion.
And what I did was, I built, we built, we took a 1920s home, and we,
redid it in federal style to accommodate the furniture and antiques that we collect.
And then we built a library
Actually, the building, the extension of our home, the wing of the house, the wing of the house was taken down, and this wing was built to accommodate the collection, the library collection, the book collection.
And when you visit, you will see the Georgian-style Chippendale furniture, the two tiers
with staircase because what I always wanted as a young person when I first started collecting after I was married collecting antiques we would visit these old marvelous homes and not only here in the States but around the world and we'd visit these libraries and we're in these homes and I said one day if I could only reconstruct
that feeling, bring back the 19th or 18th century as a physical presence, as a way of housing these wonderful books that I wanted to collect.
I would really get a kick out of that.
And so we did it.
So I want you to come see that.
Okay.
I really hope that we get a chance.
Please, in the next few weeks or whenever you're free, you'll let me know.
You'll come down.
You'll have dinner.
I've got it on tape.
You've got it on tape so you know.
All right.
Say that again.
Very important.
You want me to understand something that's very important.
I don't know exactly what Peter told you.
But let me tell you something.
We shall put it in this proper context.
What Peter might have told you is that Peter built... Peter and his associate, whose name I want to give you, because it's his associate who really was the movie person.
I'm writing this down, too.
If you just remind me, I'll keep his name... Okay.
I'm writing this down.
They really suggested to me many, many of the titles I acquired from them.
And they truly built that collection for me.
Okay?
But my book collection was built by me.
As everything else that I collected in my life, I make the choices of what I want to buy.
Very important.
Okay.
I'm back on.
Why is it necessary for you to sell your books right now?
I understand this could be a delicate question, but my assumption is that if you had your drubbers, you wouldn't sell them right now.
I'm trying to be delicate.
We've made a definite decision to move into
My daughter was married a couple of years ago.
There are two of us, Lori and I. We have this huge 30,000-square-foot house.
30,000-square-foot house?
You come and you'll see.
I don't like the sargo assembly.
And it's just...
And a collection that is, you know, just becoming burdensome at this point on a physical basis.
In order to pare down, we've got to start selling things.
The problem...
that I've got at this moment is that since we collect mostly American things in our furniture antiques and paintings, that market is dead at the moment.
You mean the market itself?
The market itself.
In other words, the selling market.
Selling at auction at this point, you wouldn't realize... So you would probably sell other things if the market was there.
Exactly.
But the problem that I have at this point
is that the only market that's alive and kicking is the rare book market.
And therefore, I had to bite the bullet.
And since the rare book collection is mine, and Gloria, my wife, really has no interest in it.
By interest, I don't mean financial interest.
I mean no physical interest in it.
You got it first to tell you.
You haven't done it jointly.
No, this was not done jointly.
As was everything else.
I decided, being that I could do something to alleviate the situation and start the ball rolling.
We're looking for new quarters right now and my house is for sale.
To start the ball rolling, I decided to sell the collection, the book collection, because we could realize, hopefully, a profitable result from the sale.
And if we were to sell any of our art or antiques,
we would realize much less than the true value.
With the sale of rare books, we will get the true value, because rare books have held the market.
Well, do you think that you'll get $2 million for the Shakespeare's in fewer than two years after you bought them?
I mean, there's a phrase, fresh on the market.
I feel that the Shakespeare's may or may not...
realize their potential.
Well, never mind their potential, but their investments.
May or may not realize their investments.
And at this point in time, I may have second thoughts, although I've committed the situation.
I really believe that everything else that I have in this election
will realize not only what I paid for it, but a great increase.
And therefore, that will make up any slack that the Shakespeare's may have not realized.
Of course, there was an underbidder there, too.
We have to remember that.
That's right.
There was an underbidder there.
We don't know who the underbidder was.
No, we don't.
Do you?
Do you think it was a Japanese guy?
It is definitely a Japanese guy.
Well, there is a Japanese guy who collects Shakespeare.
I don't know his name.
I haven't, but I don't have a look at it.
I was told that that was who it was.
Okay.
I don't know his name.
I have his name at home.
I was told that secondhand, and it may not have been.
I was not told that by Sotheby's.
Sotheby's is one of the reluctant, and rightly so, to give out their sources.
I would expect them to be in the same fashion as you were first.
Most importantly, we feel that the total result of the upcoming sale in October for the rare book collection will more than cover
the investment?
No, not only the investment, but my expectations.
But what is very important is this.
At no time have we ever bought an object or a rare book for investment.
That's consistent with what you say in that interview, by the way.
Okay?
Thank you.
I don't have to say that, but it is.
If there's any consistency, I'd jump by here with it.
Please.
But the point is, everything that you've said is consistent with what it will be 15 months ago.
That's marvelous.
They're going through examination before trial, and they use it against you.
I'm not, you know, I may look easy, but I'm not.
You're not an easy guy.
I've got some tough questions for you.
I hope so.
All right, let's go to the next one.
Are you ready?
Sure.
All right.
You must realize that the talk on the street is that you need the money, that you're in trouble financially, and that this is why you're selling the books.
I'm not telling you anything you haven't heard.
Right now, fees are tight.
We're selling and tearing down.
I think it's consistent with what I told you before.
You're asking me what my motivation is.
Now I can tell you.
The trick is never to volunteer unless you're at it.
I wouldn't have any Air Force.
I know I'm not dealing with a pussycat, by the way.
You are the mediator, by the way.
Thank you.
Capital P and capital M. Well, thank you.
This recession has affected many people.
It's affected us.
And to be able to realize
some appreciable monies.
At this point in time, being a true collector, usually puts much of his liquid assets into the collection.
That's nothing new, I'm sure, among collectors.
In order to become more liquid, so that I can take advantage of opportunities, business opportunities that have come our way, very, very important.
To get liquid now, where am I going to get liquid from?
The easiest way is to find a marketplace that is still holding its own.
Jesus, that's good.
With a loss, with a loss.
Where I don't have to take a loss.
By a loss, I don't mean, well, paintings 15 years ago, even if I sold them today, I wouldn't take a loss.
I don't mean it that way.
Can I just interrupt, please?
This is just exactly what I said in my piece.
Everything else is gone.
But books.
So you've seen this.
Absolutely.
And you said, well, I hate to do it, but.
But.
And again, I want to be like Jerome Kern.
To me.
Who bailed out nine months before the crash.
I want to bail out at a time when I can realize some realistic money for the collection.
And at the same time, be in a position to start again on a new collection.
And you're a young guy.
There's no reason why I can't.
I have no reason why I can't.
After all, forget your own current.
When Bradley Martin had that wonderful sale, it was his second collection.
Or have we forgotten?
You're making me search my mind, actually.
I think you said to me in the earlier interview that you believe in the next generation of collectors.
I asked you that before.
I said, what happens to this collection?
And I thought that maybe because you had been so generous to the Metropolitan, why not give it to a university?
Why not have the Richard Manny rare book collection ensconced in some place?
And you said, hey, you know, I get a kick out of this.
There's nothing here that cannot be replicated in some scholarly research library.
We're talking about a book, we're not talking necessarily about a manuscript.
Right.
So collectors, where would I be if the collectors didn't give this stuff?
So you said that.
It's right here.
So you really haven't contradicted yourself.
No.
And I want to reiterate... So rest assured that I haven't really trapped you in any contradiction.
Please.
No, it's not my intention to do that.
A, it's not your intention, but B, you'll never find me in a contradiction.
Because you said that.
I give it to you straight.
When times were wonderful, 15 months into question.
I mean, the world was my oyster.
And it will be again.
I'm smart.
As it has been, we've gone through three cycles like this since I'm in business for myself 33 years.
Since I'm 22 years old, I've been in business for myself.
Can we talk about the business, by the way?
Of course you can.
Just so I can know what you do.
Absolutely.
But go ahead.
Yes.
And I've seen three of these cycles.
And there's no question that in the next couple of years, everything will be turned around again and be as wonderful financially as it has been in the past.
I want to be ready.
with some expendable cash to take advantage of opportunities when they come about.
And these opportunities don't necessarily have to be investment opportunities in my collecting, but they have to be the ability to buy something that I want to have.
Since we only buy the best of what we can afford,
I want to be ready with the cash to do that.
And where I've been able to, for 33 years, take the cash out of my businesses on a continual basis to help my collecting fever, or actually our collecting fever.
I love that phrase, but I'm writing it down right now.
Because business isn't good at this point in time, I have to find that cash from other places.
Most people, I mean, you know, all of a sudden, you're looking at Dick Manning, he's got to... Do you need the money?
We're going to answer this.
All of a sudden, you're looking at Dick Manning... I'm sorry to ask the very straight angle, you're asking a question, though.
I was answering it as you asked the question.
All of a sudden, people looking at Dick Manning, and probably a lot of other people, having to sell some of their objects in order to get some cash.
The answer is very simple.
For 33 years, I have never sold an object, literally, in order to get cash to buy new objects.
99 and 9 tenths of every collector in the world sells part of his collection to acquire new things.
I have always fought not to do that.
That's why we have a tremendous collection.
Colin Franklin.
Leonard Baskin.
Exactly.
He calls himself an argent something or another.
It's a French phrase.
Argent provocateur.
Well, I am a seller-collector.
Exactly.
That to nourish the collection, I have to sell...
I build up on what I sell.
So, I mean, there is... Every collector does this.
We have never had to do that.
So now, for the first time, because we're really in a very deep recession, the business cannot... Is it a deep recession?
My profits from my business cannot sustain my collecting habit.
Our collecting habit, forgive me.
Yeah, but you're only selling books, though.
I have started just to sell my books, because I'm afraid to sell anything else, because there's no market right now for...
I'm not going to get the value back on the antiques and other objects that I can get for the books.
So if I have to sell anything, unfortunately, I've got to sell the books.
But the interesting thing about the books is I can buy them again.
Well, you told me, though.
Now, here is the first inconsistency.
That in my heart of hearts, I will never see a Shakespeare set like that again.
Yes, in my heart of hearts, I will never see a Shakespeare set like that again.
But maybe you will.
You know the funny thing is?
I don't mean to put words in your mouth.
I hope it's going to be published, even in the article.
No article will be put in the article.
You've got to promise me that.
About what I'm going to say.
The rest you can talk about.
No, no, no, no.
This could hurt my sale.
No, no, no, no, no.
This is very important for you to say, because if I score the thing with the times... In the books, it's fine.
In the book, it's fine.
Thank you.
I think it's the other way around.
Yeah.
The book is coming out after October, right?
Right.
October of next year.
Good.
Enjoy your lunch.
Would you like a glass of wine?
Only if Mr. Manny has one.
Do you have one?
All right.
Let's have it.
I'm glad you made that distinction.
I'm letting the machine run.
Now it's important for me to tell you this, because I half pitched an idea to the New York Times for a column.
Do it.
Write about me.
And I write about you.
What I'm going to tell you now, I wouldn't want in the column before the sale, but it'll kill the sale of Shakespeare.
Let me tell you what I want to tell you.
I don't want to fuck anybody in any way.
And I said the word, and then you can put it down in the transcript.
But I don't have a copy.
I'm going to give you one.
You want a copy?
You can copy it.
You can have your tapes.
Not a problem.
Listen to me.
I'm straight here.
Please, let me give a second.
Subsequent to my purchase of the Shakespeare's, I believe subsequent, I really got in depth
with how many Shakespeare's are out there in library and university collections, in public collections.
It is my strong belief that there will come a time when some of the collections, the public collections, the library collections, will hold these Shakespeare folios.
They will start to sell some of them off to raise money
because they will have no other choice.
Just like the Barnes collection in Philadelphia, starting to sell some of its impressions to God, you're going to find the same thing happening.
Is it the Meineke, which has all the... The quartos.
All the quartos and all the... Do you know how many folios they have?
No, the Folger has all the... The Folger, I mean the Folgers.
The Folger is my belief.
And I have no reason, and no one has told me this, but I believe that if push comes to shove, if all you need is money, they start to sell something.
They got $100 million.
That's right, exactly.
So what's one or two?
Or two or three.
And so I feel that there'll be tremendous opportunity to purchase Shakespeare again when I deem it the appropriate time to do it.
And if you want him at that point in your life.
Yes.
Who knows?
I collected things 15 years ago that I'm not even slightly interested in now.
Right.
Not to say that I put Shakespeare in that category, but my point is we change, tastes change.
Another tough question?
You don't mind?
Okay.
I mean, people say that you bought a lot of these books with Selfie's money, not Dick Manning's money.
Is that true or is that false?
Never in the history of the world have I borrowed a nickel to buy anything.
in my antique and art collection.
Never ever did I borrow... Oh, forgive me.
Say it a different way.
Don't get mad at me for asking the question.
The Shakespeare folios that I purchased, I was given a year to pay the bill.
So much down.
I was given an extended period of time to pay the bill on the Shakespeare folios.
Over a 12-month period, I had to pay so much in certain periods during that 12 months.
That's the only deal I ever made in my life in buying books.
So did you pay at all?
No, I paid all but a million and change, all but a million and two.
And when I decide to sell my books, I allow celebrities to take the $2.2 million off from the proceeds of sale.
Wow.
That's good.
The next logical question, then, is that selfies are not dictating the sale.
They are not demanding the sale.
Oh, of course.
Oh, God, no.
I could have, if I wanted to, wrote them a check with a million in change, or I could have given them a million in change worth of other options.
Which you could do easily.
I could have given them back to Shakespeare's and kept my book collection.
Right?
Shakespeare with two million in change, right?
I would have a million and change.
A million two, I think.
Or one or whatever.
A million one.
So I could have given it back to Shakespeare's, which was sure going to get a million won at any sale, and therefore I'm off the hook.
So I'm not selling my book collection to satisfy Sotheby's.
Read my lips.
Very important.
OK, say it again.
I'm not selling my book collection to satisfy Sotheby's because my book collection
We'll have a, and this is in a very bad market, a low of 4.6 or 7 and a high of 7 point something.
A million.
So when did the books leave your house to go to York Avenue to go to South Beach?
Three or four weeks ago.
Were you there when this happened?
I was there when it happened, and how did you feel?
Surprisingly, once I make a decision, there's very little in life, there's very little in life that affects me in my gut.
The only thing that affects me in my gut is my wife and my child.
Everything else is a perfect voice.
Wonderful.
See, you could actually be a Greek.
I sure could.
I know in my heart somewhere I've got Mediterranean blood.
I've got to set this up for a second, all right?
This is not for publication.
Well, you don't want to get ripped off.
I don't want my daughter to have a kidnapping scare like she had when she was a kid.
But I'm selling my books.
It's bullshit.
My collection's worth $100 million.
The books or the art?
No, my art, my aunt, he goes with $100 million.
The books are superfluous financially.
I just don't want to sell any part of that $100 million and take a whacking,
I want to say a whacking loss.
What we want to say is, I don't want to take any loss, but if I wait two years, I'll get all that profit that I'm entitled to for all the years I've had this stuff.
The books, I'm not going to take the loss on because they're holding their value.
I can use some money right now, so I've got to sell the books.
But I've got enough assets to go back and buy those books again in spades.
You come to the house and see.
You'll understand.
Now, why are you moving out of the house?
It's too big.
Yeah, but you told me you just died seven years ago.
That's recent.
But the time moves quickly in your life.
The problem is that my wife is ill.
I don't have to use this right now.
My wife is ill.
She doesn't want the strain.
Having to run a 30,000 square foot house.
You understand when you see it now.
And yes, I can use some money.
As a collector, I spent all my liquid income in my disease.
I've got to get liquid.
This is true.
And this you can print.
This you can print.
I'm laughing because it's such a great quote.
I've got to get liquid.
Now, what am I going to get liquid with?
Something I'm going to take a deep loss?
I'm a businessman.
I'm a successful businessman.
Since I'm 23 years old, I've been in business for myself.
I've got enough smarts to know.
If I'm going to sell anything of what I collect, I'm going to sell what I can at least, what at least has maintained the price.
Should I go and sell?
I'll go and sell a child Hassam, which is probably one of the three finest Hassams that he's ever painted.
You know, I have every Hassam book, every illustration.
It's four foot long.
It was done.
It's the root bone apart.
That alone, in good times, I'll get $10 million.
At one point in time, at the right time, I'll get $10 million.
I'm going to sell it now.
I have to have my head examined.
That's what I'm talking about.
What did you pay for it?
I paid close to a million dollars for it.
American impressionist art from the two or three great American impressions will skyrocket in the next 10 years.
To a point beyond belief, I'm sitting with one of the three pictures of the greatest American painter of impressionist art.
I agree.
I'm saying $10 million.
Who knows what it will be worth in a good market?
Because no one is going to be able to, very few people are going to be able to afford French impressionism.
The great stuff.
Well, I wonder if anybody's going to be able to afford Charles Hassam or Travis Akins, you know, at some point.
But at least I may be one of the lucky guys who so much to pay $30 million for paying for it.
Isn't that wonderful?
It could happen.
You know, Elizabeth Taylor had a Van Gogh, was it, that they brought in.
Even though she paid nothing for it.
They said, screw that.
We're not going to get its value.
Am I right or am I wrong?
The reason for that was?
The same thing that you're saying.
She sold it at the time the market started going down.
She didn't sell it.
They bought it in.
I mean, she tried to sell it at the time the market was going down.
I don't think she paid $200,000 or $300,000 for it.
Right.
I don't think she paid a million for it.
What's the most you've ever paid for anything?
I mean, in collecting.
Shakespeare.
Really?
2.5 million.
No, I'm kidding.
You mean none of your art pieces ever receded that?
No paper.
Let's see.
No?
Well, the Shakespeare was the... You have to understand, we spend about five or six million dollars a year in art collection.
But we buy a lot of objects.
That's the problem.
Can I use that figure?
I don't want to embarrass you.
I'd like to use it.
I know you would, but I would hate to do that, only because... You know, see, I'm a nice guy.
I shouldn't even have asked you about that.
No, no, the reason is...
Some of the things, only what's going to happen is... See, I've been through a terrible kidnap scare.
I have no idea.
And you've got to understand, it has to be a... I'm giving you all this interview and being straight.
Do you understand?
That's why I didn't have to ask you.
I didn't have to follow up on it, did I?
Did I have to follow up on it?
No, of course not.
This is my point.
Yes.
I gave you the option to...
It's a wonderful, I mean, it's an exceptional, it's an extraordinary figure, but I don't want to... Which last are you talking about?
Let's jump back to something you told me last year.
that when you started going to auctions, that it more or less supplanted a need.
A gambling instinct.
And you talked about the Baccarat tables.
Absolutely.
You never went back to the... Do you still feel like a gambler?
My business is a gambler.
And what I do for a living...
that I buy and sell excess inventory from major manufacturers, divisions of companies, and I pay for these assets with media, advertising media, which I'm in,
And I have to know where to resell this stuff and make a profit.
So that's a gamble.
And my business is trying to buy low and sell high.
All of this is a gamble.
I've been gambling all my life.
When I was single,
And when, first few years of my marriage, I also gambled in Las Vegas.
But when I started to collect, it supplanted that need for gambling, at least in a Las Vegas setting.
Or a casino setting.
But my business, I still gamble.
You still do?
My business, I still gamble.
But my...
Art, book collection, piece of collection, the auction process have also planted that gambling need because the high that is generated at an auction in auction room far exceeds any high I ever got.
A baccarat table, a crap table.
I'm not trying to share it myself.
On a poker table.
Okay.
Question.
Were you a bidding for the Tamerlane?
Did you know that you were bidding against the Reserve?
Yes.
At all times, I knew that.
Even when one dealer, who should remain nameless, came to me and said, I did you a favor.
I stopped at a certain price.
I said to him, bullshit.
I would use that, all right?
I mean, the bullshit is important.
I said the bullshit.
You stuck because you didn't have any more money.
No, because a lot of people have said, you know, Dick Manny was bidding against the Reserve, but I don't think he knew it.
You all knew you could bid safely against the Reserve.
And the moment the Reserve was reached, you all put your hand down.
I didn't.
And that's the difference.
Well, did you know what the reserve was?
Of course.
No one told me, but I assumed what it was.
What did you figure it was?
What did I pay for it?
$198.
What?
Yeah, that was about what the premium was.
So $198 was the premium?
$180 without the premium, right?
Something like that, yeah.
The reserve was $175.
But you knew that.
Yeah.
But then Bill Self, that is for $150 because there was no Dick Manning out there, right?
No Dick Manning out there.
God knows what the next one that I'm putting on the market is going to be.
but you certainly hope it's more than 198.
And I'll be honest with you.
If it isn't, I won't care.
In for a penny, in for a pound.
But I really believe that combined, my collection will more than compensate me for my investment.
Although I don't invest.
More than compensate me for my cost.
OK.
Um, black coffee would be good.
Yeah, cappuccino.
Oh, I have a special.
Okay.
Louise Taper is out to prove that she's not a bimbo.
Fine, okay, I can appreciate that.
She's a gal.
Yes.
She's about 20 years younger than her multi-multi-millionaire husband who married a Taper, marked Taper, married Taper.
She's doing her own thing, doing her own swath.
And, uh,
And she wants to show that she has some intelligence and that she can put together a world-class... Is collecting... Do you collect for yourself?
Do you collect to prove something, to leave a legacy?
Is the name Richard Manning?
You have your name in two rooms at the Metropolitan.
You have your name in Chicago.
You have your name down in Delaware.
It's important, isn't it?
Yes, it is.
To a degree.
My wife and I have... have done these things...
Because we felt that it was important to educate not only the public, curators, dealers, collectors.
Do you believe that or there is a kick?
No, no, no kick.
I'll say it a different way.
Look at I just come, Dick Manning, a tremendous kick.
Go ahead, I'm sorry.
The kick is wonderful and the kick is the motivating force.
for doing anything.
But how do you evolve what you want to do?
And evolving what you want to do and who you want to be and what you want to represent is different than the kick.
The kick is the end result of all these things.
And therefore, what we're all about is trying to put together definitive collections that instruct and teach
And the proof of that is when we put the John Henry Belter furniture collection together, we put that together because up until that time, John Henry Belter Victorian furniture was like aspirin.
It was a nomenclature that defined any kind of elaborate Victorian furniture.
But who was Belter?
What actually did he manufacture?
Why was he important?
And we put together a definitive collection to show what he did.
And we're doing the same thing with Jonathan Pryor.
And we're trying to do the same thing in putting together a comprehensive American painting collection.
And I have tried to do this with my American and English literature collection and with the rest of the books that I have put together.
Now, none of it is done without malice or forethought.
And my mouth is a forefooter in the best of all possible ways.
It's done with instruction in mind.
It's done with putting together the kind of a collection that teaches and expands somebody's universe.
It's not done for my aggrandizement or my wife's aggrandizement.
That comes.
That is a priori.
That's there based upon what it is.
The motivation is to put together the best of what we can put together.
Everything else follows from that.
If it means that I have become a major book collector, and that maybe I'll be remembered for my book collection, for what I put together,
I didn't put the collection together to produce that effect.
That effect comes because of what I put together.
Okay.
Did you know that you were selling the books before you sent them over to the Groyer Club or after?
I never knew that I was selling my books when I made the arrangement with the Groyer Club to show my books.
And that's very important.
It is, because some people are a little upset about that.
You know that.
Of course I know that.
And those who know me, and it's very important, Jim Cummins, who helped me select from my collection those books which I exhibited at Rolier, would be the first to tell you that a year before, a year before, and I have to stress that,
is when I made the commitment to Gloria that I would have this exhibit.
And I didn't know until three months before that I was going to sell my book collection.
And I wrestled with this problem and talked about it with Jim and my wife.
And I said... This is going to be misconstrued.
It is.
It is, by the way.
You know that.
Well, I didn't think... I thought I overcame that.
No, I've heard... Recently?
Yeah.
Okay.
You have to understand.
But basically, older New York women, you know what I'm saying?
Yeah.
a few people who thought that maybe you were showcasing the books.
No, no.
Let me tell you, it is very, very important because... Well, it is.
Because this is not... You have to know me.
You have to understand that I'm going to ask you anything that I feel is important.
Please, it's very important.
And I want you to because that clears the air, and it's very important.
Because if we don't answer it, then there will continue to be an innuendo.
Absolutely.
Over a year before the exhibit at Groyer,
Approximately a year before, they asked me to buy one, a selection of my collection.
And I said, they asked you?
They asked me.
Do you remember who asked you?
Yes.
I have a letter to that effect somewhere in my... I forget the gentleman's name.
Bob Nykirk, maybe?
Somebody like that.
He died.
He died, by the way.
Oh, no, I didn't know.
The letter of Bob Nykirk, he was a librarian.
Yes, but I didn't know that he died of AIDS.
I had no idea.
I know everything.
Well, that's okay.
You're supposed to.
That's your job.
It's very important that you understand, and it's physically documented.
I received letters in the mail.
What I needed was to destroy my collection.
And I, of course, said, I think about it.
And I said, yes, very shortly thereafter.
And I said, is it a part of my collection?
And they asked me, would I like anybody to help me?
And they mentioned Jim and Jim Cummins.
and I would select some of the books out of the collection for the exhibit.
It was about six weeks or two months before the exhibit that I made the decision to sell the collection.
That's why it's only about three or four weeks ago that somebody's picked up the collection.
It's very recent.
This is very recent.
This is like three months in the making.
I mean, if you put it all together, it's three or four months.
Who initiated the thing with Sotheby's?
You were Sotheby's.
Well, I initiated it, but let me explain how that worked.
Sotheby's was owed $1.187 million or something like that.
On the Shakespeare.
And that's how you owed them?
That's how I owed them.
And I owed that to them in...
January of this year.
It was due January 9th of this year.
And I asked them until February if I could pay them, and they said fine.
February came along, and I said to myself, I will
sell some objects to pay the bill rather than send them a check.
And I sent them a list of objects.
This is February, March now we're talking.
Pretty recent.
That's right.
The list of objects were some Tiffany lamps, some arts and crafts furniture, a painting or two or three, and a few children's books out of the collection.
Minor stuff that I really
had no interest in.
That was March already we're talking now.
February March.
And that started to linger while Sotheby's was making decisions as to whether it was worth a million change.
They wanted too many change to cover themselves, because they liked to work on a 50% situation.
And rightly so, and I could appreciate that.
So it really wasn't until March or April, probably April, and I'm not 100% sure of the exact dates I'm talking to you, but probably around then, but I said, you know, let me bite the bullet.
Try to raise some money.
Let me get a little liquid.
It's tight now.
What am I going to sell to really raise some money?
Think about what I owe Southerners.
No, what do you need the money for?
Well, I actually needed to pay Southerners back.
That was the real motivation.
And then I said, why just do that?
Things are tight.
I can only draw so much out of the business.
There are things that I don't want to stop the lifestyle.
But you are by selling the house, but then you said that the house is too big.
We don't know when the house will be sold, though.
It's on the market, but you're dealing with a very expensive house.
Thank you.
You're dealing with a very expensive house, and therefore, you know, in a market like this, you don't know when it's going to be sold.
Okay.
So I said, what the hell?
The collection's worth, I don't know, $7 million.
The book collection?
The book collection.
And I'll put that up at Sotheby's and sell it, because that, if nothing else, that will at least make a market.
Is that your expectation, Seven, off the record, after the sale not to be used?
Let me give you their estimates.
Their estimates are four and three-quarters of
The seven had changed.
Shit, it's got to be better than that.
It is, but they've lowballed it.
You understand?
I mean, the Shakespeare's the two.
Exactly.
It's a lowball collection, but I don't care about that, because I'm of the philosophy.
But still, as book collections go, it's extraordinary.
Yes.
There have only been two $20 million collections, one 16, and the rest are down there.
How can I explain it to you?
I don't care what the estimates are.
Because it's going to reach the value, whatever that is.
You understand?
Estimates have no bearing in an auction.
See, in the book market, better than any market in the world, most of the buyers are dealers.
And they know what things are worth.
Therefore, estimates are bullshit.
They have no meaning.
They're going to pay.
Guys are going to vie.
Guys are going to vie for these objects based on what their clients are willing to pay, too.
There are a few things about speculation today, by the way.
There's always a client, isn't there?
Absolutely.
Do you think that maybe the acquisition was a big kick for you?
like Jerome Curran or, you know, getting it was part of the trick and then maybe you got a little bit bored with it?
No.
Because I asked you once, how do you enjoy these things?
It's not like looking at a picture on the wall.
I mean, that's a reproduction over there.
Let me tell you what it is.
It's a little more complicated and more cerebral than that.
If you talk about a picture or a piece of furniture, for me, the hunt is everything.
Once it's acquired, I do love it.
Do you possess it, though, or do you love it?
I don't possess it, but I continually find more and more joy about it.
I embrace it.
I don't possess it, but I do embrace it.
A lot of the objects I embrace.
Because I think that's fine.
It's a very tactile thing.
I mean, we pick up a snifter and we... Yes, but what I really embrace is my books.
And that's where it's a little more than just a hunt.
It's a little more cerebral also.
When it comes to my books, it's not only the hunting for the fabulous book...
or manuscript but it's the ability to embrace the first expression of this particular piece of literature or this particular piece of literary
Manipulation.
Find it in its absolute pristine condition.
What do I mean by that?
Take fiction.
In the 19th century, double and triple decades were very prominent.
And in England, they were first published in boards.
And I would rather buy an old, dirty,
book in boards than in the finest binding that the original owner put in it.
Can I shut up just for a second?
Yes.
The most recent translation of Don Quixote, which has gotten the greatest accolades in the last five years, was to buy a smallest translation.
Brought out by Ferris Clarkson.
Which I have, and I showed it to her, and I said, you see what we got?
how could you possibly beat him down i said because if i didn't he wouldn't respect me no also am i right or am i wrong of course they think he was giving something away yes more than that more than that it's much rarer than people think because i am hunted i got a back translation for years and let me tell you something
The translation that everybody has is a Jarvis translation.
That's the standard English translation of that period.
By a smaller, you cannot find.
It's scarce.
Nobody knows that.
But I made a study of it.
Two bucks that day.
At least it's worth three.
Eighteen at least.
I beat the son of a bitch now.
I feel guilty about that.
He took it, didn't he?
Of course.
Well, it's part of the adventure.
That's what it's all about.
You do this, but this is fun, isn't it?
Absolutely.
And I do it.
I do it in the same way that you've done it.
You know, I've seen you do it on a different level.
I've seen you at the book fairs.
You're on your hands and knees.
Absolutely.
You get injured on yourself.
You get sweaty.
I love it.
It's a passion.
You know, and you say, ah, right?
Yes.
Isn't that it?
That's what it's all about.
It's not investment.
It's not anything like that.
It's the love of finding the object, that marvelous book in the original condition that it came off the press.
And I can imagine the author standing there or getting sent to his home the first copy that the printer printed.
I want one of those comments.
You know, you said to me in this interview here that you are not, you personally are not an artistic person.
Well, I have a great look for it.
I mean, that you physically cannot paint a great picture or write a great story.
And so therefore, there's kind of an osmosis thing that maybe by...
possessing yes i'm creating these several things that you're connecting with the creative spirit and this is absolutely and what it is is that by putting i'm hoping that when this collection goes off at auction someone will say that my gosh what this fellow put together
was an assemblies of some wonderful things that have moved and entertained the world.
At that point in time, I can say that, see, I had an appreciation and have an appreciation
of those important things that have gotten a rise out of me, entertained, informed, and made me progress through the world, and hopefully made others progress through the world.
Is a good catalog important to you?
Yes.
For one reason.
This one?
Yes.
And these books.
and manuscripts are given the due that they deserve.
Yeah, but also that they are collected under the Richard Manny collection.
Yes, absolutely.
But they constitute the Richard Manny collection.
Yes.
That I had enough foresight and wherewithal to put together an instructive collection.
Well, you're a young guy.
I figure 54.
Is that about right?
Yes.
Just turned 55.
Okay, so just turned 55.
June 19th.
So what happens?
I mean, is this after book collecting?
Oh, God, no.
I'm haunting the book fairs and the book stores and the antiquarian bookshops and the used bookshops.
No, this is Jerome Kernel over here.
I just have to raise a little money.
I think the collection can raise what I need and not have me feel that I gave the collection a way to do it.
Well, I might have had to give some of the art or antiques a way to do it.
Of course, the market is not good for that, or it is good for books.
And I'll start over again.
I mean, to me, it doesn't mean me.
It doesn't make a difference.
Sure.
Maybe I'm rationalizing.
Because I do have some objects that I may not be able to get again.
After all, Mark Twain's husband that he gave to Libby, his wife, on Christmas.
Well, did you have a choice on what you could give selfies?
Sure.
I could make him want it.
But you gave him everything.
That's my nature.
You have to understand me.
If I'm going to cut the heart out of my collection, I might as well give them the collection and at least put a catalog together and offer to the public a value and a total assembly of the things that I put together so that they will come to the auction and feel that their time was lost.